We just learned how the value
function computed for
a given policy can be used
to find a better policy.
In this video, we will show
how we can use this to find
the optimal policy by iteratively
evaluating and proving
a sequence of policies.
By the end of this video,
you will be able to outline
the policy iteration algorithm
for finding the optimal policy,
understand the dance
of policy and value,
how policy iteration
reaches the optimal policy
by alternating between evaluating
policy and improving it,
and apply policy
iteration to compute
optimal policies and
optimal value functions.
Recall the policy
improvement theorem.
It tells us that we can
construct a strictly
better policy by
acting greedily with respect to
the value function
of a given policy,
unless the given policy
was already optimal.
Let's say we begin
with the policy Pi 1.
We can evaluate Pi 1 using
iterative policy evaluation to
obtain the state value, V Pi 1.
We call this the evaluation step.
Using the results of the policy
improvement theorem,
we can then greedify
with respect to v Pi
1 to obtain
a better policy, Pi 2.
We call this
the improvement step.
We can then compute V Pi 2
and use it to obtain
an even better policy, Pi 3.
This gives us a sequence
of better policies.
Each policy is guaranteed
to be an improvement on the
last unless the last policy
was already optimal.
So when we complete an iteration,
and the policy remains unchanged,
we know we have found
the optimal policy.
At that point, we can
terminate the algorithm.
Each policy generated in
this way is deterministic.
There are finite number of
deterministic policies,
so this iterative
improvement must
eventually reach
an optimal policy.
This method of finding
an optimal policy
is called policy iteration.
Policy iteration consists of
two distinct steps repeated
over and over, evaluation
and improvement.
We first evaluate
our current policy, Pi 1,
which gives us
a new value function that
accurately reflects
the value of Pi 1.
The improvement step
then uses V Pi 1
to produce a greedy policy Pi 2.
At this point, Pi 2 is greedy
with respect to the value
function of Pi 1,
but V Pi 1 no longer
accurately reflects
the value of Pi 2.
The next step evaluation makes
our value function accurate with
respect to the policy Pi 2.
Once we do this, our policy
is once again not greedy.
This dance of policy and value
proceeds back and forth,
until we reach the only policy,
which is greedy with
respect to it's
own value function,
the optimal policy.
At this point, and
only at this point,
the policy is greedy and
the value function is accurate.
We can visualize this dance as
bouncing back and forth
between one line,
where the value
function is accurate,
and another where
the policy is greedy.
These two lines intersect only at
the optimal policy
and value function.
Policy iteration always
makes progress towards
the intersection by projecting
first onto the line
v equals v Pi,
and then onto the line
where Pi is greedy with
respect to v. Of course,
the real geometry of
the space of policies
and value functions
is more complicated,
but the same intuition holds.
Here's what this procedure
looks like in pseudocode.
We initialize v and
Pi in any way we like
for each state s. Next,
we call iterative
policy evaluation
to make V reflect
the value of Pi.
This is the algorithm we
learned earlier in this module.
Then, in each state,
we set Pi to select
the maximizing action
under the value function.
If this procedure changes
the selected action in any state,
we note that the policy
is still changing,
and set policy stable to force.
After completing step 3,
we check if the policy is stable.
If not, we carry on and
evaluate the new policy.
Let's look at how this works on
a simple problem to
build some intuition.
Remember the four-by-four grid
ruled example we
used to demonstrate
iterative policy evaluation.
Previously, we showed that by
evaluating the random policy,
and greedifying just once,
we could find the optimal policy.
This is not a very interesting
case for policy iteration.
Let's modify this
problem a little bit
to make the control
task a bit harder.
First, let's remove one of
the terminal states
so that there's
only one way to end the episode.
Previously, each state
admitted a reward of minus 1.
Instead, let's add
some especially bad states.
These bad states
are marked in blue.
Transitioning into them gives
a reward of negative 10.
The optimal policy should follow
the winding low cost path in
white to the terminal state.
This additional
complexity means that
policy iteration takes
several iterations
to discover the path.
Let's see how this plays out.
First, we initialize
a policy and value function.
As before, we choose
the uniform random policy,
and set the value estimate
to zero for all states.
The first step is to use
iterative policy evaluation to
evaluate the uniform
random policy.
Since you've seen how
this works before,
let's skip straight
to the result.
The values are quite
negative everywhere,
those slightly less so
in states near the goal.
Next we perform
the improvement step.
You've seen how
greedification works before.
So again, let's
skip to the result.
Notice that near
the terminal state,
the policy correctly follows
the low cost path toward
the terminal state.
In the states in
the bottom row however,
the policy instead
takes them more direct,
but lower value path
through the bad states.
Let's evaluate this new policy.
Notice how after
just one improvement,
the values are starting to
look much more reasonable,
but we aren't finished yet.
Let's greedify again.
Remember, the policy
improvement theorem tells us
that this new policy is an
improvement on the last one,
unless we have already
reached the optimum.
Specifically,
the bottom-right state now
goes straight up along
the low cost path.
One more step of policy
evaluation reflects this change.
The value of the bottom
right state goes from
minus 15 to just minus 6.
Let's keep going until we
reach the optimal policy.
One more step of
improvement improves
the action selection
and yet another state.
The next step of policy
evaluation reflects this change,
improve again, and
evaluate, and improve.
Now, we can see that the policy
has reached the optimum,
and follows a low cost path
avoiding the blue states.
Evaluating one more time
gives us the
optimal value function.
If we try to greedify again,
the policy remains unchanged.
This tells us that
policy iteration is complete,
and the optimal policy
has been found.
This example shows the power
of policy iteration,
in that it guarantees we
can follow a sequence of
increasingly better
policies until
we reach an optimal policy.
Policy iteration cuts
through the search space,
which is key when
the optimal policy
is not straightforward,
in this case literally.
The same complexity will come
up and problems we
really care about.
In this week's assessment,
you will have
a chance to implement
policy iteration on a slightly
more realistic example.
That's it for this video.
You should now understand
how policy iteration works
by alternating between
policy evaluation and
policy improvement,
and how policy iteration
follows a sequence
of better policies
and value functions
until it reaches
the optimum policy and
optimal value function.
See you next time.